---
title: "Coding Fundamentals for Human(s|ists)"
authors:
- Dennis Tenen
- John Simpson
bibliography: main.bib

---

## 0 Introduction

We write this chapter as a general reflection on teaching computing fundamentals in the
humanities context, and more specifically in the wake of teaching
two instances of **Computing Foundations for Human(s|ists)** at the Digital
Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI), University of Victoria.[^ln-titlelink] This
week-long course was intended for humanities researchers with no previous
programming experience who wanted to learn how programs work by writing a few
simple, useful programs of their own.[^ln-courselink] The topics covered included
working with files and folders at the command line, text-stream manipulation
with the Bash Unix Shell, regular expressions, and Python basics like native
data types, variables, functions, and control structures. At the end of the
course, our students worked on their own and in small groups to create a small
web scraper, an "essay grader," a comma-separated value file manipulator, and a
program that evaluates poetry based on its measure of similarity to Byron's.

Our aim in this chapter is not to recapitulate the experience of
teaching (we would not have the space to do it here, in any case), but to reveal
some of the core principles that went into making the course, to talk about the
rationale behind our teaching philosophy, and, more broadly, to suggest an
approach to teaching programming in the humanities environment.

[^ln-titlelink]: "Human(s|ists)" is actually a regular expression, a way to
search text for specified patterns.  In this case it picks out anything
starting with "Human" and ending in *either* "s" or "ists".  So, it acts as a
stand-in for both "Humans" and "Humanists".  This little flourish in the title
is important because it signals a number of the principles that guide the
course and signal what is to come.

[^ln-courselink]: An archived version of the course can be accessed at
http://web.archive.org/web/20150614161609/https://github.com/denten-workshops/dhsi-coding-fundamentals/blob/master/README.md

<!---
JS: Should we say something about coding vs programming here?
DT: I don't have strong feelings about the distinction. Up to you.
PRP: Skipping for now---seems like the intro does what it needs to without the
distinction
--->

## 1 Critical Computing in the Humanities, Core Principles

It is our firm belief that the teaching of computational principles in the
humanities must be grounded in the practice of humanities-based research and
answer to the values held by the academic community. Inspired by a number of
initiatives advancing a similar philosophy, we refer to this approach as
"critical computing."[^ln-first] The following ten principles connect key ideas
in computation to values intrinsic to humanistic inquiry:

[^ln-first]: We are not the first nor the only instructors to think about
things this way, nor are we the only ones to be offering a course like this.
For example, Software Carpentry has been advocating a similar approach since
its inception. Similarly, the *Programming Historian* is "an online,
open-access, peer-reviewed suite of tutorials that help humanists learn a wide
range of digital tools, techniques, and workflows to facilitate their
research." See also @harrell_toward_2015.

### 1.0 Demystify the black box (as much as possible).

<!---
Let's limit these to one paragraph each. We can go into greater detail in later
sections.
--->

Contemporary computational devices are a fact of daily life. They are involved
in everything from financial markets, to archival research, and to the way many
keep in touch with friends and family. Yet, for those without computational
background, the inner workings of these devices remain a source of mystery and,
consequently, frustration. Recognizing this, our course targets daily
computation. We want our students to understand not only the principles of
programming, but the basics of networking, security, and operating systems. As
much as possible, we would like to reveal the innards of opaque computational
"black boxes," empowering our students to take control of their everyday
computational practice.

### 1.1 Use few, free, small, simple, universal, and powerful tools that you can hack and understand.

Researchers, librarians, students, and faculty are faced with a bewildering
array of software choices. In making the decision to invest time and resources
into learning a new tool or methodology, we are guided by "Unix Philosphy" and
by the Free and Open-source Software movement (FOSS). The Unix way of computing
privileges small, modular pieces of software that "do one thing well"
[@mcilroy_unix_1978]. Such software can then be chained together with other
small but powerful tools to achieve complex results. FOSS software works in the
academic humanities context because free and open access code is available for
inspection, and therefore, for interpretation, critique, and modification.
More than anything, we seek out tools that we can understand and, if needed, to
customize to fit our own particular needs and contexts. When deciding what to
use and what to teach, we seek out universal tools that underlie a variety of
computing practices, from library infrastructure, to web design, to data
science and critical-edition making.

### 1.2 Wherever possible store data in human-readable text streams.

The file formats that we use to store data have serious implications for
anyone's ability to make use of that data in the future. As the formats chosen
tend toward obscurity or opaqueness it becomes increasingly difficult for new
programmers to read during development and for others to draw on them in the
future. Choosing appropriate file formats relates closely to the proliferation
of closed tools and platforms. It is most acutely felt by archivists faced with
preserving short-lived data structures from obsolete platforms from recent
past. For many humanists, who rarely work with truly large datasets or
collections, the real risk of rapid obsolescence offsets any hypothetical gains
in speed or performance offered by a new note-taking platform or a complex
database.[^ln-plain] Similarly, when coding, we begin by having our students
describe their program, step by step, in language natural to them and to their
task. Pseudo code in plain English becomes the basis for well documented
programs. Such programs are easy to read and to maintain. If forced to make a
compromise, we privilege legibility and longevity over tersity of expression or
performance.

<!---
I moved the plain English point here.
--->

[^ln-plain]: Conveniently for us, the Unix philosophy privileges inputs and
outputs in plain text format, which can be used to store everything from
personal notes, to article drafts, to huge datasets of metadata. Unix provides
many powerful utilities that operate on plain text. In fact, a notion of human
readability is encoded at the operating system level. When faced with a list of
compromises, in the name of design, performance, efficacy, or legibility, we
consistently prioritize legibility.  That choice informs our practice
throughout. When working with audio or visual material, for example, we
similarly prefer widely-supported, non-proprietary standards. When selecting a
data format, we ask: does it need special software to render? How long has it
been around?  and What organization is responsible for maintaining the
standard?

### 1.3 If you have to do something more than ~~once~~ a hundred times, automate.

Programmers are smart and lazy. After doing a task more than a few times, a
good programmer's intuition will be to automate the task. For example, we often
use the `rsync` command to back up our documents; however, after a few months
of running it manually, the user can delegate that task to the built-in
scheduler called `cron`. The saying normally goes that if you do it more than
*once*, automate. However, one must know exactly what to automate. When backing
up your files, do you want to back up the whole system or a few select folders?
How often should the backup script run? The answers become apparent only after
extensive manual use. As we introduce automated "daemons" that run tasks on our
behalf, we want to make sure we think through any unintended side-effects:
technological, personal, and political.

### 1.4 Do it right---*the first time*.

Although programmers are lazy, they are lazy in the right way. Doing things
badly, in a haphazard fashion, accumulates technological, intellectual, and
eventually an ethical debt, to oneself and to the community. Code comments are
the simplest example of this. It is easy to skip documenting one's code. "It
just works, why bother?" However, a piece of code that makes perfect sense
today, becomes obscure tomorrow. Without comments, time needs to be spent to
recreate the reasoning behind the original implementation. Similarly, we advise
our students against simply cutting and pasting code snippets from our
tutorials. We want them to follow our thinking, to annotate, and to review
their notes regularly. In the social context, lazy practices are unethical
because they "bank" against the labor of others, in the future, literally
borrowing someone else's time. Doing things the right way now saves unnecessary
effort later.

### 1.5 Target daily, real-world computation.

Programming classes in the sciences often begin with coding for coding's sake,
intended an audience inherently interested in logic, math, and engineering. The
humanities must find its own intrinsic motivations for learning to code, broad
enough to appeal to the community at large. For this reason, we begin our class
with exercises that target daily computation and writing related tasks that are
common to humanities researchers whatever particular research interest they may
have. We create small "experiments" that address one's writing, for example.
These include a lab session in which students analyze their own documents for
commonly over-used "weasel words,"[^ln-weasel] for example. Working with one's
own documents introduces important concepts like "relative" and "absolute"
paths, file formats, and small shell utilities like `grep` (used to search
through text files), `wc` (word count), `sed` (stream editor for text
transformation), that can later be extended into more advanced concepts in
system administration or natural language processing. When put
together, these small utilities form the students' first programs, performing
tasks like "safely rename all the files in this folder according to
such-and-such rule," or "keep a daily log of my writing progress."

[^ln-weasel]: Weasel words are words that sound very meaningful, but instead of
adding, diminish the impact of persuasive writing. The "very" in the previous
sentence, for example.

### 1.7 Bootstrap and time well spent.

When thinking of what to teach or where to invest our time, we look for
"bootstrapping" effects that come from using powerful, universally available,
and extensible software. The command line, for example, useful at first for
file management and operating system exploration, later becomes an important
resource for remote server administration, web design, and data science. Skills
learned in the command line transfer to physical computing, fabrication, web
scraping, and text analysis. Learning about relative and absolute paths
locally, eventually helps to explain internet infrastructure, domain names, and
resource allocation. It leads to Secure Shell and Pretty Good Privacy (PGP),
both used by activists and journalists to protect their communications from
surveillance.

It may be appealing at first to hide computational complexity behind "simple"
visual interfaces. Yet, these interfaces do not share a common visual language
and they do not transfer well across software platforms. Our colleagues in
computer science sometimes worry[^ln-observe] that introducing command line
interfaces and raw coding environments may serve to alienate humanists. We
believe that limited, "dumbed-down" interfaces do even more harm. They further
alienate an audience that already feels removed from the material contexts of
their daily knowledge production. In building the foundations, we want our
students to spend their time well: to learn tools and skills that can support a
wide variety of activity within diverse cultural contexts. The extra care we
take in explaining the reasoning behind our technological choices works to
motivate the students through any initial difficulties of learning how to code
properly, without artificially hampered and patronizing simplification.

[^ln-observe]: Mention the CS chair observation [???].

### 1.8 Divide big problems into small, modular components.

[Seems this could be collapsed into 1.2 for the sake of simplicity.]

Our goals in the classroom go beyond the instrumental. The ability to automate
machines is merely a side effect of programmatic thinking. To learn to think
like a programmer is useful in all contexts: it involves dividing big, complex,
and seemingly intractable problems into small, modular, solvable components.
Making a cake, for example, seems hard. But one can read, write, and follow a
recipe---an exercise that we use in our teaching. Similarly, large projects
from library administration to dissertation writing can benefit from the power
of programmatic thinking.

### 1.9 Keep poking, get help, take notes, comment, annotate, share, remix, and train others.

[Could we collapse this into 1.0?]
[Possibly add in the importance of teaching them how to help themselves...]

Finally, and this was noticed by several course observers over the years,
students in the humanities are sometimes curiously hesitant to explore their
machines. In the absence of a tinkering upbringing and in the presence of
cultural divides that regularly reinforce norms like "Those in the Arts and
Humanities can't do programming, math, science, etc.", they might be worried of
breaking expensive equipment or losing sensitive data. Demystifying the magical
black box and learning some habits that prevent irrevocable loss of data
addresses that fear, encouraging the students to tinker and to explore.
Researchers at the later stages of their career may be particularly reluctant
to ask for help or to express their questions in public. Our teaching approach
therefore encourages shared expertise. We model not being afraid to expose our
own gaps in knowledge. We ask students to keep copious notes, to annotate their
code, to share and improve on each other's work. Notes grow into tutorials,
tutorials into courses and workshops. Eventually, in following these
principles, we hope for our students to become catalysts of change in their own
communities of practice.

## 2 Digital Humanities Core

Programming can involve long stretches of frustration (Why does this not work?)
punctuated by short bursts of elation that comes with accomplishing something
difficult (It works!). Rather than allowing students to view their initial lack
of results as failures, we attempt to channel feelings of hindrance into a
practice of problem solving and discovery, related to similarly difficult, but
more familiar tasks of archival research and long-form analytical writing. Just
like writing, coding skills fall on a spectrum of proficiency that constitutes
a small, but foundational part, of a larger variegated skill set.

Depending on one's research interests and career path, a DH practitioner will
have some mixture of the following core skills (with examples in parenthesis):

- Text markup (plain text, *Markdown*, *Pandoc*, *TEI*)
- POSIX command line proficiency (*Bash*, regular expressions)
- Content management (*Jekyll*, *Wordpress*)
- Version control (*Git*, *GitHub*)
- Programming language (*Python*, *R*, *JavaScript*)
- Networking (SSH, VPN, hosting)
- Security (PGP)
- System administration (*AWS*, *Linux*, *Apache*, *MySql*)
- Project management (*GitHub Issues*, *BaseCamp*)
- Probability, statistics, algorithms

Computational practice in the humanities begins with text. Whatever our home
discipline, we are all involved in the reading and writing of texts. It is
natural then to commence training with textual transformations: to understand
how text is produced and where it resides physically, on the machine. Learning
to author in a mark up language like HTML or Markdown is often a first step
into the world of critical computing. Text transformations lead to the
operating system and the file hierarchy. Tasks like regular backups and desktop
organization can be used to familiarize the student with foundational concepts
like relative and absolute file paths, or the distinction between plain text
and binary formats. The idea of starting with daily computation also suggests
covering version control and content management early in the curriculum.
Although not an easy subject, version control comes naturally to a community
used to thinking about drafts, manuscripts, and revisions. Increasingly,
version control systems can also serve to host websites, to stream data, and to
create full-blown publishing platforms. For example, *The Programming
Historian* journal uses *Jekyll*, a static website generator, and GitHub Pages
for publishing and distribution. Using that model to create personal academic
profiles, image galleries, or critical editions is another good way to engage
the humanities community. Git has the additional benefit of encouraging
students to take notes and to journal alongside their work. Similar to the
scientist's lab notebook, the Git journal fixes the flow of ideas and labor,
helping teams keep track of work and attribution.

A programming language occupies a central place in computational practice. All
forms of digitality pass through some form of encoding and automation. Only a
small step separates text transformations, command line shells, and content
management systems from a Turing-complete programming language. We often
"trick" our students into programming by automating simple tasks like word
substitution from the command line. The same task could then be repeated using
*Python* or *R*, reinforcing skills learned earlier in the process. Because the
internet plays such a key role in transforming academic practice, knowing the
basics of networking: infrastructure, routing, packet switching, protocols,
security, encryption are also key to higher level activity like preserving free
speech online, protecting a journalist's sources, or bypassing censorship
filters. The care and maintenance of personal document archives---research
papers, article drafts, and book manuscripts---grows into server management.
The server is where many of the skills learned earlier come to fruition. The
running of websites requires a long "stack" of technological components. These
are almost impossible to use well without knowledge of the command line, a
programming language, and computer networks.

No project is complete without some sense of planning and organization. Project
management is an important part of computation in the private sector, and, an
increasingly formalized part of software engineering.  Projects fail and
succeed by the measure of their ability to coordinate action across time zones
and continents. When teaching programming, we ask our students to start with
"scoping" their projects in plain English first, then to transform these
technical specifications into pseudocode, which then serves as the basis for
program design and architecture. We ask our students to submit these documents
along with code and consider them as important as a functioning program.

Finally, programming fundamentally involves a measure of algorithmic thinking.
On some abstract level, the specific languages, tools, and implementations are
secondary to the logical structures that support all higher level activity.
This may be the most difficult obstacle to tackle. Every word cloud, every
topic model, and network visualization tool hides a number of assumptions
driven by sophisticated logic that comes from the fields of statistics and
computer science. Without training in the methods we are bound to remain mere
consumers of technology. Critical computing practice, like critical thought,
requires a measure of logical and mathematical literacy.

We do not mean for this list to represent a comprehensive statement about
computation in the humanities. Rather, we would argue that most projects,
however large or small, employ at least *some* aspects from most of the above
categories. Their ubiquity is what classifies them as "core" or "foundational"
competencies. Few people apart from professional computer scientists and
software engineers would claim mastery over the full stack of what is mentioned
here. It is much more likely for digital humanists to develop proficiency in
one or several areas of practice. Yet any one of the above foundational
competencies have "spillover" effects in "leveling up" the rest of the list.
Our intensive, week-long class can only begin to address a small part of the
larger, complicated puzzle.

## 3 Three Locations of Computing


<!---
JS: Our approach owes a small debt to Software Carpentry since this is what I have based a good chunk of the content on the first year and some of this got rolled
into the second. This is likely the place to acknowledge it.
DT: No problem. Let's do it in footnotes though.
--->

We often begin our courses in outlining the above "big picture" principles,
challenges, and considerations. There is no hiding the fact the programming is
difficult and that people who do it well often have much "soft" knowledge (like
command line expertise or game mod development), not formally taught in the
university environment. Instead of offering quick but shallow victories, our
approach is to engage the students intellectually. For this reason, we begin
with the "frustration points" of everyday computing. In our experience, even
simple tasks like saving a file from the internet browser is rife with anxiety
and frustration. Where did that file go? How do I find it again? What type of
file is it? Modern operating systems purposefully hide such information from
average users. Yet our users are not average. Rather, they are students,
faculty, and librarians who rely on documents, file systems, and datasets as a
matter of critical importance. They have typically put years, if not decades,
into acquiring expertise in academic disciplines and can certainly rise to the
challenge of computation. In our experience, they respond extremely well to the
mission of reclaiming the material contexts of their daily intellectual
practice and learning how to control more directly the computers through which
they carry out much of their research.

Guided by this approach, we have identified two core competencies from our
"wish list"---ones that we believe can have a significant impact on "launching"
a new student into the field of digital humanities and computational culture
studies. The first of these is the Bash, a Unix shell and a command language
for text-based "dialog" based interaction between humans and machines. The
second is Python, a widely-used modern Programming language, that, like Bash,
privileges simplicity and human readability.[^ln-versionlink]

[^ln-versionlink]: Given that we have looked to Software Carpentry for some of the methodology that we employ in the course it should be noted that we do not spend any time on version control via tools such as Git or Mercurial.  This was done initially so that more time could be spent on programming concepts, hands-on coding work, and unpacking the black box that is the command line.  The importance of version control for efficient and effective coding via protecting against loss and enabling collaboration with others is recognized and future versions of the course may include it as a consequence.  As with all training that is already time constrained down to the essentials, the challenge is what to take out to add this in.

More directly, there are six properties that Bash and Python embody that make
them particularly suitable for an introduction to coding class:

1. Simplicity. The idiosyncrasies of programming names within Bash/\*nix aside, the syntax used within both Bash and Python is relatively straightforward.  In Bash almost every task can be broken down into a series of single-line commands that could alternatively be chained together into a single line through pipes (|) and redirects (> and >>).  Python does away with much of the frustrating syntax embedded in languages that came before it, saving users from needing to remember to close anywhere near so many brackets in exchange for a format that improves readability.
2. Power. Both Bash and Python are able to do a lot, pretty much any programming task really. Granted, they may not be well-suited to any programming task but together they can form a universal swiss army knife of coding, allowing users to get done what they need done.
3. Durability.  Neither Bash nor Python are going away anytime soon, making it the case that solutions that are written in either will continue to be functional beyond the foreseeable future.
4. Universality.  Both Bash and Python are widely used.  While it is the case that Bash is confined to /*nix-style operating systems there are emulators that reproduce its functionality on most systems that a student in the class is likely to encounter.  Python, and tools that help write Python code, is likewise available on all systems that a student of the class is likely to encounter.  As a consequence of the ability to use both tools in a wide range of environments in conjunction with the other properties listed here both are used in a wide range of environments by very large user communities.  This makes it the case that help is widely available.
5. Hackability.  It is relatively straightforward to write one's own commands/methods within both Bash and Python *and to see how those that currently exist were written*.  While this is not something that we cover in our courses the possibility for end users to investigate and expand the languages that they are working on goes directly to the heart of empowering users by unlocking what would otherwise be black boxes.
6. Fun. Packaging up the previous properties as they have been in both Bash and Python has resulted in the ability to have coding experiences that are not only effective but also fun.  Both Bash and Python invite a sort of call and response methodology that is at once engaging and interesting, drawing students forward in their learning.

### 3.0 Bash?

> Bash is the GNU Project's shell. Bash is the Bourne Again SHell. Bash is an
sh-compatible shell that incorporates useful features from the Korn shell (ksh)
and C shell (csh). It is intended to conform to the IEEE POSIX P1003.2/ISO
9945.2 Shell and Tools standard. It offers functional improvements over sh for
both programming and interactive use. In addition, most sh scripts can be run
by Bash without modification.[^ln-bashlink]

[^ln-bashlink]: http://www.gnu.org/software/bash/

### 3.1 Python?

What is a programming language?

control structures + data types + built-in functions + syntax + interpreter
Why Python

### 3.2 Text Editor

| When to use Bash                  | When to use Python       |
+-----------------------------------|--------------------------+
| - automate daily tasks            | - data science           |
| - manage files & folders          | - app development        |
| - remote server administration    | - NLTK                   |
| - data munging[^ln-munge]         | - data visualization     |
| - quick & dirty text manipulation | - glue code              |
|                                   | - everything else        |

[^ln-munge]: Data munging is a recursive computer acronym that stands for
"Munge Until No Good," referring to a series of discrete and potentially
destructive data transformation steps [@raymond_mung_2004].

Live coding. Conversational programming. Interactive. vs.

| Interactive Programming           | Text Ed |
+-----------------------------------|--------------------------+


### Conclusion

These three locations build solid foundations for critical practice in the
digital humanities. All more advanced stuff rests on these foundations. In
starting here we dispell anxiety and illusion.
